Always happy to have a full house in the back.
We got enough seats.
Wow. Alright, we're ready to go now.
Um, welcome everyone. Uh, we'll just introduce ourselves.
I've got a few sub minutes here, so we'll just do this.
Well, I'm Greg Oy, chair of the committee,
and, uh, currently the member of Parliament for
Greg Fleming, the National Party, uh, MP for Mongo,
Or one you Dunno.
Paul Garcia National MP for newly,
Um, steel, Wade Brown, uh,
green party list MP based in the,
And between us we make up the petitions committee.
Alright, so we are hearing today from the Home Educators
Student Sports Association.
That's correct. So you can take your submission as read.
Um, we have you for 10 minutes.
Um, but, uh, feel free to, um, to
speak to your submission
and hopefully leave time for questions.
I'll try my best. Um, honorable members of the committee,
thank you for the opportunity to speak today on a matter
of profound importance to our nation's young people.
My name is Natasha Lucas, a committee member of hessa,
and this is Peter Gore.
Um, my colleague Hessa exists, uh,
to address a fundamental inequality, the systematic denial
of access to mainstream student sport
for home educated young people.
The HESSA petition was launched in 2025
and resonated nationwide demonstrating
that the discrimination in youth sport is of concern
for most, a reflection
and a reflection of our shared values.
Of fairness as a nation.
He was established in 2023 prompted
by school sport IT school sport NZ itself
and under their lawyer's guidance specifically
to meet every SSNZ eligibility requirement.
Progress was positive until October, 2025
when SSNZ abruptly stopped engaging with us.
Since our submission, SSNZ have voted
to exclude homeschool students from all SSNZ sanctioned
events, this is despite SSNZ unanimously adopting a
constitutional change in May, 2025
that would've allowed associate members like HESSA to join
and then abruptly reversing this change in November, 2025
to full exclusion.
Although SSNZ claims this exclusion applies only to it
to its events, regional
and national associations always adopt SSNZ rules,
making this a nationwide exclusion at all levels.
Please see cycling N Z's rules and the folder I've
provided it has been recently updated.
Following SSN Z's recent policy change,
the top five sports for young people.
An netball, volleyball, basketball, rugby union,
and football are all primarily delivered
through school sport, meaning home educated students cannot
compete with their peers in any of these sports.
SSNZ claims alternatives exist through clubs.
This is demonstrably false SSNZ.
Uh, many high schools restrict students from joining club
teams, which causes youth club teams to disappear entirely.
Please see the Campion College policy and the folders
provided this, this leaves home educated young people
with no option but to join adult teams,
which is physically unsafe and emotionally inappropriate.
Some sports such as rugby, cricket,
and volleyball have no youth pathways available at all.
Imagine a really 15-year-old playing rugby against 130 kg
prop 10 years his senior.
It is brutal, unfair, and unsafe.
I encourage you to look up any team sport in your region
and search for youth leagues
that high school age students can participate in.
This demographic is non-existent in the club scene.
At this point, I wish to introduce you to Ethan
Ethan's in the backlog there.
Ethan is incredibly brave to be here today to stand up for
what he knows is right.
Cricket is a massive part of Ethan's life.
He started playing at age five
because of his neurodivergence, including autism,
autism and A DHD.
His dedication, tenacity,
and love for the game is nearly unmatched.
Cricket means the world to him.
He was informed just last Monday that he can no longer play
with his friends from Kaari College halfway
through his season.
Um, he also won't be able to be selected any longer
for his regional team as he did last year.
Because selectors only go to SSNZ tournaments.
There are no alternatives for Ethan to say
that Ethan is confused and devastated is an understatement.
The human face of ssn Z'S exclusionary policy is filled
with grief and anguish.
Ssn Z'S exclusionary policy is putting children at risk
of regressing socially, physically, and emotionally.
As mentioned above, selection for provincial
and national development pathways
happens almost exclusively at SSNZ events
by barring home educated students.
SSNZ is not just denying participation.
It is systematically extinguishing students' dreams
and potential careers by preventing them from ever appearing
before a selection panel.
Imagine denying the next Valerie Adams access
to a developmental pathway.
This exclusion affects thousands of young New Zealanders.
There are over 11,000 homeschool students in New Zealand
with more than 4,200 at secondary level.
Home education is a government recognized pathway
that sits alongside other education options like
taura and charter schools.
The bias against homeschool students become stark
and excruciatingly apparent when you realize
that taura students studying at home full-time
with an enrollment number can compete in any SSNZ tournament
while a home educated student with a,
with a legal exemption cannot.
Both groups learn at home yet one is excluded.
It begs the question, what is this exclusion really about?
SSNZ claims home educated students can train for eight
to 10 hours a day giving these students an unfair advantage.
But HESSA requires members to demonstrate
that they are meeting Ministry of Education requirements
to be taught as often and as well as they would at school.
The New Zealand Performance Academy roa
as a new charter school,
a special character being developing high performance
elite, um, athletes.
The existence of this charter school should allay any fears
that home educated students might have an unfair advantage.
The long-term effects of this exclusion are serious.
Decreased physical activity,
increased mental health challenges
and loss of social connection.
As clearly seen in Ethan's case,
the Chief Children's Commissioner, Dr.
Claire Achmad has called the S-S-N-S-S-N-Z rules
discriminatory and stated
that they simply don't need to exist.
The Minister of Sport, honorable Mark Mitchell,
has urged Sport New Zealand to find a solution
and we have found cross-party support as well
as NZ Youth Parliament being in full support
of our petition, SSNZ
and Sport NZ point to hisa small membership
as a sign of low demand.
This is a fallacy.
The barriers have been so immense
that only the most dedicated athletes even attempted
to navigate the complex exemption process.
This is not disinterest, it is a sign
of a discriminatory system
that actively discourages participation
in, sorry, apologies.
That's very helpful. I should have brought my own.
Um, this, uh, this is not disinterest.
It is a sign of a discriminatory system
that actively discourages participation
in the United States.
The first Tim Tebow laws passed in 1996,
and they are now used by 35 states
to ensure equitable access to secondary age sports
for homeschool students.
This model has worked for decades.
SSN Z's, full exclusion of home educated students
and Sport N Z's.
Ongoing support for SSNZ makes legislation the only reliable
pathway to equity discrimination under the New Zealand Bill
of Rights refers to unfair treatment based on a defined set
of protected characteristics.
Currently, education status is not protected.
Creating room for this absurd discrimination hiding
behind legal formalities is not
how we expect community leaders to behave in 2026.
We have exhausted all options
and humbly ask for parliament support.
We recommend making SSNZ funding conditional on allowing
home educated students to compete with their school peers
as a temporary solution.
But what Ang Tahi
and their families really need is legislation guaranteeing
access to secondary age sports for all young New Zealanders.
Neither hessa nor SSNZ are crown entities.
Ultimately, the responsibility sits with the crown.
There are over 4,000 young people who this year
will not have safe and equitable access to team sports.
This is an abomination
and it is a government issue to solve thus far.
SSNZ has been the vehicle for delivering sport
to secondary age students.
But we ask, do they need to be, especially as the dominance
of school sport means access
to common sports is not freely available
to all young people in New Zealand.
It is the crown's duty to ensure young people in OT
have equitable access to sport, not hisses and not ses.
Nzs. The folder also contains a letter from Ethan's family.
Lastly, I wish to share a quote from Ethan, one of thousands
of young people about to discover
that politics are seemingly more important than people.
It is our hope that by understanding the human cost
of this policy, you will be spurd to action
and create the legal safeguards
that ensure every young person in New Zealand has the right
to participate in the sport that they love.
Ethan's words, I just want to play with my friends.
I don't know why I can't play anymore
Honorable committee members.
Is this the kind of ROA you wish to live in?
One that shatters dreams and crushes hearts.
Thank you for your time today.
Alright, thank you. Look, we've got time for a couple of,
uh, questions.
Just, um, brown,
Thank you Chair.
Um, I just wanna say and
and follow up with a question that I was honored
to have a homeschooled student as my youth parliamentarian
and she really opened my eyes to some of these issues.
There are so many reasons that people are homeschooled.
Yeah. Um, but,
and there are so many inequities in ability in
parental money to help you be a ski, um,
competitor or so on.
I just don't understand why there is this rule
and, um, I hope we'll be able
to forward this if there are any, um,
exclusions of particular sports
or whether it should be team, whether it's, um,
individual or anything like that.
Is there anything that you think would make it easier
to get this through or just should it just be a
general allowance?
We, we believe that it's a pretty simple solution.
We, we would like full exclusion for all sports
that SSNZ has sanctioned over at the moment
and it's not a difficult problem to solve.
Um, school support New Zealand speaks about 25
students are impacted.
Uh, I I dispute that
because we don't speak on behalf of 25 students.
We speak on behalf of 11,000 students.
No, but they say that it's only 25.
25 impacted 25.
No, that was two, that was a year and a half ago.
25 students applied for exemptions during that time.
Those were the students who were really desperate
to get into tournaments
that there wouldn't be getting into in any other way.
Where all across New Zealand, there are students,
homeschool students playing sports in almost all high
schools without the knowledge of Hessa.
They're not HESSA members.
But as of the 1st of January,
those students will no longer be able to play with
high school teams because it's a blanket exclusion.
Alright, look, sorry we've got quite more submitters here.
There's no worries at all. Thank you very much for, for
Your submission. Thanks
for your time. Thank
You. And uh, thank you
for very effective submission
and, uh, particularly, um, um, on behalf of Ethan.
Thank you very much.
Alright. School sport New Zealand.
Alright, thank you. And, uh, now you've, uh, heard
10 minutes take your submission as read,
but very keen to hear from you
and, uh, hopefully leave time for questions. You sure.
Uh, Lieutenant Kota Carta Cole, Mike,
I'm the Chief Executive of School Sport New Zealand.
Thank you for the opportunity to appear here today.
On behalf of school Sport
New Zealand are now member schools.
I'd like to begin by being very clear about
what school sport New Zealand is and what it isn't.
School Sport New Zealand is an independent
membership organization.
It was established by schools, it's governed by schools
and it exists for schools and their enrolled students.
Our mandate is not universal youth participation.
Our mandate is school-based sport delivered as part
of the secondary school education system under the authority
and the responsibility of schools themselves.
That distinction is critical
to understanding our position on
this position, uh, petition.
We fully acknowledge that home education is a lawful
and legitimate pathway in New Zealand.
We also acknowledge the sincerity of the concerns raised
by the num, by the families represented by Hisa.
And we recognize the personal impact of exclusion from sport
that that can have on young people.
This is precisely why school sport New Zealand has not taken
a closed door approach over many years,
but particularly since 2019.
School Sport New Zealand has actively engaged
with non-membership organizations, including hisa,
to explore how participation opportunities can be created
within our school sport calendar without undermining the
purpose and the integrity of the system
that we're responsible for.
That engagement has been real, it's been sustained
and it's been tangible over several years.
Homeschool students have been able to
and have participated in school sport New Zealand sanctioned
events through agreed mechanisms.
In total, approximately 26 homeschool students participated
in sanctioned events in 2025 alongside more than 74,000
secondary school students.
That's not because of limitation or
because of issues around how they can access.
I would, I would argue that the exemption process is
relatively simple and
that we didn't deny any actual participation
through those exemption processes.
It just represents the scale of the participation
and the scale of the challenge in front of us.
This participation has primarily occurred through
what we have as Cup and Carnival events and through local
and regional discretion where organizers
and schools have chosen to be inclusive where they can be.
So the question really before the committee is not
where the school sport New Zealand is engaged
or whether any participation has been possible.
The question is really about championship tier events
and where the school sort sport New Zealand should be
required to allow full inclusion at
that level of our offerings.
Championship events are designed differently.
They're designed purposefully in that, in that regard,
they exist to determine which school
is the national champion.
They sit at a point where school identity,
school accountability, competitive integrity,
and educational purpose inters most strongly.
When a school enters a championship event, it does
so in its own name under the authority of its principal
with the responsibility for student welfare
eligibility and conduct.
Those events are not simply competitions,
they're an extension of the school environment.
For that reason, school sport new New Zealand members have
consistently chosen
to retain championship events as school only.
That decision's not made lightly.
It has been debated for decades
and most recently through the largest review
of eligibility regulations in more than 15 years,
involving extensive commonwealth consultation with schools
and sports across the country.
At that point, I need to reduce an important development
that occurred During this engagement
with Hessa School Sport,
New Zealand received formal communication from Hess's legal
representatives that
unless full inclusion at championship level was permitted,
it reserved the right to seek a judicial high court review.
At that moment, our responsibility
as a governance based organization was clear
we could not make unilateral changes
that cut across our constitution,
our members collective decisions
and the purpose for which we exist
as any well govern governed organization would do.
We returned the matter to our members,
sought their direction
and acted on their behalf
to safeguard the organization
in the system that they govern.
The outcome of that process reaffirmed a very clear
position, championship tier school sport should remain
for schools and their enrolled students.
And given the significant changes that would require
for full inclusion sought by Hessa
and full inclusion only members voted
that all school sport New Zealand events be reserved
for schools and their enrolled students
only petition before.
You also asks that Sport New Zealand funding be made
conditional on school sport
New Zealand allowing full inclusion.
Full inclusion. We strongly appro oppose
that approach sport.
New Zealand's investment in school sport New Zealand is made
to strengthen outcomes within the school sports system.
Its support, its supports, coordination, governance,
workforce capability, and system integrity.
It is not a mechanism for directing eligibility decisions,
nor does it involve
participation decisions on the school sport.
New Zealand Calendar Sport New Zealand has been explicit in
its own submission, eligibility
decisions set with school sport.
New Zealand's in it and its member schools.
Sport New Zealand has no legal
or formal mandate to direct those decisions.
Making funding conditional would effectively override school
governance and fundamentally change the purpose
of the current investment that would not create clarity
or inclusion that would destabilize a system
that currently delivers organized sport opportunities
for tens of thousands of school students every year.
Finally, I want to correct an important misconception
that appears throughout the petition school sport.
New Zealand does not control all local
and regional school sport competitions.
Regional sport delivery is governed
and managed in different ways across the country
by regional sport trusts, by college sport organizations
and local school groupings.
Those bodies act independently
and many already include homeschooled students in their
competitions where it makes sense locally.
School sport, new Zealand's national rules apply
to school sport New Zealand sanctioned events,
not every instance of youth sport participation.
So the claim that school sport New Zealand universally
dictate exclusion at local
and regional levels is simply not accurate.
School sport. New Zealand supports continued dialogue,
better national data and stronger community
and club pathways for homeschooled students.
What we cannot support is redefining school sport into
universal youth sports system
or overriding the collective governance of schools
to speak directly to the educational reality
behind those decisions.
I'd like to invite our board chair to address the committee.
Uh, good. Uh, au Good afternoon. Um, my name's Tim Ko.
Um, I'm the chair of of school Sport New Zealand
and also the principal of, um, Shirley Boys High School in,
uh, which is in Christchurch.
Um, and I suppose my role here today is really just
to talk to you about the school.
Um, I guess the perspective of of schools
and why they care very deeply, um, about the issue
because I think it's what we wanna be clear about.
It's not excluding young people, um,
but it's about protecting the, the integrity
of the school system, that that's really what that's about.
And so I think it's for schools sport is, is not an add-on.
Um, it's part of the educational experience that is
provided, um, by secondary schools.
It contributes to students', uh, belonging, uh,
to their attendance, wellbeing, to their leadership, um,
and their connection to school life.
So when a school enters the competition, it really is,
I guess making a statement
and that that statement is that those students represent us
as a school, we support 'em and we stand with them.
Um, and we're accountable as well.
And so we wanna make sure that that's very important
and that accountability, um, is really
around being responsible for student safety and,
and welfare, um, eligibility
and attendance, so having some requirements around
that pastoral care.
Um, and also ensuring that sport
supports rather than undermines the learning that occurs.
And that responsibility only works
because school sport is grounded, um,
within a student being enrolled at a school.
So championship level events are
where those responsibilities are probably most acute.
And the championship level events are very sort
of high stake environments.
Um, they have a significant influence on school culture,
on a perception of a school, um, on school camaraderie
and the school spirit that exists.
And, and if schools were, were required to include students
who were not enrolled, it would fundamentally change
how teams are selected and managed in practice.
It would introduce performance based selection pressures
that cut directly against the ethos of school.
Sport. Principles are deeply concerned
that full inclusion at championship level would lead
to situations where schools feel pressure to select athletes
who are not part of the school community.
Uh, students who are enrolled at the school miss out on
opportunities and the educational purpose
of school sport is gradually eroded.
And that that's not a theoretical, uh, concern.
That is exactly why composite teams rules,
eligibility limits and enrollment requirements, um, exist.
They're not about winning at all costs.
They're about ensuring
that school sport remains are school centered
and not talent driven.
Um, I also would like to address the idea
that this is about numbers or,
or convenience from a principal's perspective,
this is not about how many homeschool students there are.
It's about that clarity of purpose.
Once a boundary between school sport
and general youth sport is blurred at the top level,
it becomes increasingly difficult to hold
that boundary anywhere else.
Schools are not resource staffed
or mandated to operate as open community sports clubs.
We are educational institutions that said,
schools are not indifferent
to the experience of homeschool students.
Many principals support inclusion at local
and regional levels where it works.
Many regions already do this, as Mike has explained,
but that inclusion happens
by choice based on low local context relationships
and capacity, not
by compulsion imposed at national championship level.
That flexibility is a strength
of the current system, not a failure.
Uh, as secondary school principles, we value fairness, um,
but we define fairness within the context of our role.
Fairness means ensuring that school sport, uh,
serves enrolled students supports learning
and reflects the values of schools
as educational institutions.
When school sport New Zealand consulted with principals
during the recent eligibility review,
principals were very clear and consistent.
We, we support engagement,
we support participation pathways,
but we do not support redefining championship school
sport away from schools.
In closing, I would like the committee to understand
that the position that you are hearing from school sport
New Zealand is not an abstract, um, governance stance.
It is the collective voice of schools expressed
through their national body.
We ask that you respect
that school sport is a distinct system designed
for a specific educational purpose
and governed by the institutions, schools
that carry responsibility for it every day.
Uh, KDA and thank you for the opportunity
to speak afternoon.
Cool, thank you. Uh, one question.
The high court, the, the high red letter received
around the high court review, did that ever, um, materialize
Hasn't happened since the special general meeting.
Uh, they've reserved the right to do so.
Alright. And so, uh, did I hear you say that had that,
did the, that letter that you arrived, did that
change, did that force you into a position?
Did you feel like that had sort of, um, sort
of mandated a decision?
I don't think it was, it's a mandated decision in terms
of a legal threat, no.
Um, it's, we, our members have gone through a process
that really talks to what school sport is defined as and,
and why that purpose exists.
But certainly as a,
as a governance organization being threatened
by a high court judicial review, we had a, a responsibility
to act in a way that safeguards the organization
Probably. Did that instigate
that
Discussion? No.
That, that discussion was, was underway
and it was part of a process, uh, that Hessa used
to push a decision.
Uh, Mr. Lennick, But just so I'm clear.
So, um, the relationship
with homeschool students was working Okay.
Uh, in our opinion it worked well. Yeah.
Uh, I think the real issue was, uh, the subset
of championship school sport, which sits at the very top end
and there's significant eligibility, um, yeah.
Regulations for schools
And yeah. And
that involves a couple of dozen students,
Uh, in terms of the numbers of homeschool students
that were looking to enter championship events.
Yeah, I think you could count it on one hand. Okay.
And to be completely honest,
they also were participating in it.
The issue was that they weren't allowed
to meddle in that composition.
So, so, um, what am I, am I,
am I right in understanding then that we've, we've,
we've gone to what, what sounds to me to like the,
the full nuke position where that,
where now the homeschool students are excluded completely
because of, in your view, um,
and understanding your, your view being, um, felt, felt
as though you, you were pushed to that position
by hessa demanding all or nothing.
I think it's certainly a consideration that the board
and our members had to, had to consider as part
of a decision, but also the opportunity around the reviews,
the constitutional, the governance changes
that we've made really make clear what school sport is.
And it is for schools.
It probably, it probably gave schools
and principal the opportunity to reflect on the importance
of secondary school sport and,
and the importance of that in relation
to students attendance at school.
We've got a, a, you know, a nationwide push
around improving attendance, all of those sorts
of things about actually people
who are involved in a school, having the ability
to compete at those highest levels.
And actually it's the, it's the opportunity
to be involved in that education in the school
and all of the, the great things that go on in the school.
Yeah. It, it's about actually protecting that sphere
as well, that we want young people to be at schools.
Yeah. And then get the opportunity of being able
to participate in school and in sport
because they are attending a secondary school.
But there's 11,000 students in New Zealand who
for very good reasons, uh,
are not part of the school system.
And it seems like, and, and that's, and, and,
and holding your position as a very strong advocate for, um,
full-time education along with,
or institutional education with homeschool.
Sounds like for the longest period of time
that dance was able to hold the tensions.
Then we are dealing with, with a, with a set of a subset
of students, on one hand you've got one group, which
by their own admission don't represent
or homeschool students or even close to it.
They've given you guys an ultimatum.
And that then seems to have pushed you guys
to a position now where all 11,000 students in all
contexts are excluded.
Is that what I'm hearing?
No, I wouldn't say that's fair.
I'd say it's not all context.
Yeah. I, I think it was part of that, but,
but as Tim said, we were already engaged in a process
that was reviewing what was the purpose
Of school sport.
So, so, so for your own school term, surely,
boy you've still got the homeschool pupils are still able
to participate at some level,
but just not on a national level. Is that right?
Uh, not, not a, we, we would need to work through
that at a local level,
but if they, if we had to homeschool students
approach us about combining for a
national championship event, uh, we wouldn't be able
to to have them.
And I think frankly, probably we wouldn't
because we wanna look
after the students who are enrolled at our school.
That, and that's probably the,
I think the viewpoint and the perspective.
Uh, and clearly it came through
and, um, from our members that
that's how the principals feel.
Alright, thanks. Clarifying that,
that you got time for one quick question. Not a statement
About 99 questions.
No, no. You've got a question.
One question. Okay. What would the,
what would the mechanisms be for
homeschool students to affiliate in some way
with local schools?
Yeah. So that they accept, um,
the behavioral rules perhaps that, you know,
when you're away, you behave like this, this,
you know, parental support.
I, I understand why you don't want random people joining
your school team, but is there some mechanism for, um,
teams, 'cause clubs, sport just doesn't do it for 14
and 15 year olds that aren't clubs people have moved
on after bribery.
That's right.
I guess there would need to be some very,
very clear expectations.
And I think that is really difficult to define without
probably speaking, I'm not gonna speak on behalf of all, um,
secretary principals in New Zealand.
But the one thing is, is that in most schools
the ability to play sport is based on criteria.
It's around academic achievement, it's around attendance.
It's actually around ensuring
that you don't just turn up once a week
and get ticked off on the role.
And you can play in the, in the top team.
Very good schools will be having a
requirement around attendance.
And that's very much part of our rules.
Every school's working around that.
So how do we actually know
that when those young people aren't attending
on our campus, on our site?
How do we manage all of those sorts of things?
Um, but those are probably the, you know, and,
and we are actually required by law
to have students attending, uh,
and to record their
attendance and all those sorts of things.
So, so how do we, I guess some
of the questions people would have is how do we manage that,
um, with students who are actually not part of our school
and part of that school system?
So I guess there is, you know, some of that,
those mechanisms would really need
to be looked into very, very clearly.
And I think it's beyond the realms of just sport as well.
'cause um, you know,
there is an increasing focus on attendance in schools in
New Zealand, um, and rightly so.
And, and how do we manage, how do we manage that?
So I think there's a wider picture to that.
Alright. Thank you very much. Thank you.
Um, it's, it's clarity. Mm-hmm.
Um, and we now look forward
to hearing from Sport New Zealand.
Thank you for the opportunity.
It's a great committee for finding out things we
you very little about.
We arrived here,
Koto, uh, Mr.
Chair, vulnerable members.
Um, uh, introduced my colleague, uh, Julie Morrison, um, GM
of strategy, policy and investment.
And myself, Jim Ellis, uh, group manager
of play active Recreation and sport.
Um, I just wanna acknowledge, um, Natasha
and Peter from Hessa and also Ethan
and, uh, your bravery being in the room today.
Um, Tim and Mike from School Support New Zealand.
Um, I won't repeat our submission as you requested chair,
but just a few, uh, key remarks.
Um, just to outline Sport, new Zealand's position,
and I'll make them brief, um, with knowledge, uh,
has a submission, uh,
and their wider advocacy for inclusion, um,
for homeschool students.
Uh, there are different advocacy bodies
that we hear from in terms of organized sport.
Um, and they've been a really valuable voice
that's more recently been added to that mix.
Um, I think we're all aligned on the value
that organized sport brings to all young people.
Uh, and therefore the importance
of ensuring quality opportunities exist for all young people
to be engaged in organized sport.
Uh, we talk about young people in the context of today,
generally talking 13 to 18 year olds.
Uh, heter have stated that every New Zealand student
deserves fair and equal rights
to compete in student sport events,
including homeschool students.
Sport New Zealand has a slightly wider view than that.
Every young person in New Zealand deserves fair
and equal rights to participate in organized sport,
including homeschool students.
And that is our wider view
and our strategic focus paramount to that.
Um, and possibly contradictory to what you heard earlier
is sport New Zealand's strong view that opportunities exist
for young people outside of the school sport system.
Uh, there will be, um, there will be areas where
that is imperfect.
There will be regional examples and you heard of one today.
Um, and there'll be code specific examples.
Um, but I think we think that is a foundational bit
that when the evidence that we have
and what we know of the sports system suggests
that school sport is not the only avenue for, um, people of
that age, and in this case homeschool students, uh,
to be competing in organized sport.
Um, and that can look like, you know,
say ongoing club competition, regional events, pay
to play competitions, um,
and other forms of sort of social social leagues.
All of those opportunities, including school sport fold
for individuals into recognized talent pathways run
by national sports organizations,
they are not exclusively run, um, by, uh,
participating in school sport.
Uh, competition. Um, important that we acknowledge
that the organized sports system as applies
to young people is imperfect across our rah.
We do have significant regional differences.
Uh, we have, uh, young people
who miss out on the opportunities to participate.
And that is fundamentally our strategic focus
and how we allocate resources to try and minimize
and reduce young people missing out on opportunities
to take part in sport, be that for reasons of gender,
disability, family, financial circumstance, or other.
To that end, we invest in a broad range of organizations
to try to ensure that there are sporting opportunities
across the whole system for your young people.
And we acknowledge that as a cohort
more understanding is needed of the barriers too
and the aspirations of
homeschooled students in organized sport.
And as part of our submission, you'll be aware, um,
that there is now a survey live in market,
which we're hoping will drive, uh, much clearer findings
and an evidence base, uh, for Sport New Zealand, uh,
to make meaning of in the near future.
Um, I'd also acknowledge that, uh,
in particular the encouragement of
Minister Mitchell Sport New Zealand has engaged
and supported both parties in quite an extensive mediation
exercise, um, over recent months.
Um, and we're disappointed as I think all parties are
that we're at the stage where
that ultimately wasn't successful.
Um, in conclusion, sport New Zealand is proud of the work
that our partner organizations,
national sports organizations, regional sports trusts,
disability organizations, school sport organizations
have undertaken over recent years to improve inclusion
of all those missing out.
And we have good evidence
that our strategic approach is working.
A more young people today are enjoying the benefits
of organized sport, obviously.
Happy to take any questions, Mr. Chair?
Alright, Mr. Fleming,
Thank you very much for that.
What would you, what would your advice to Ethan be?
Um, it's particularly difficult one
'cause when we acknowledge those regional differences, um,
I think we know that cricket in the Wellington region
as an example, might well be one of those.
So it's not easy in any way to sit here
and say the world is perfect
and Ethan has other opportunities.
I think we would be really keen to understand
what might be the engagement at a local level
as Tim Kott has spoken to.
Yeah. What might be that opportunity to engage understanding
that, uh, the ruling that school sport New Zealand, um,
has made, uh, in the way they've described
doesn't mandate individual schools necessarily at that level
to be involved in some form of participation in that code.
So high school, for example, could choose to,
uh, include Ethan, uh, in their teams.
They could select him, take him through all the way through
to the representative level,
and that wouldn't preclude them from those tournaments.
It's almost impossible for me
to be specific to that example.
Okay. But the individual school
and the individual rules of the,
of the regional competition in this case either run at
Wellington or College Sport Wellington, um,
would apply in that case.
But it's certainly, um, the ability of an individual school
to engage in some of the activities that might pertain to
that sport, whether it's the actual matches
or not, will be very much case by case.
Okay. So just so there is a possibility,
so obviously Tim's saying
that at Shirley Boys the answer would be no if he came
to them, but you are saying that it's possible
that Ty School could take a, uh,
that they could take a, um, a different approach.
They could include Ethan and,
and not be precluded from those tournaments
If ultimately the rules of the competition permit that.
Okay. So that would be clear.
And I think, I mean Tim, Tim was clear
that he wasn't speaking for, couldn't speak
for all secondary school principals.
Yeah. Um, and different schools will unquestionably,
you know, over 400 secondary schools,
there'll be different perceptions of it if
Different schools, and probably just for absolute clarity,
um, the exclusion at the, uh, school sport New Zealand, uh,
national championship level of Kaari College first 11,
which Ethan May be in for as an example, made it
to the national competition.
Um, he would not be able to compete at that level.
Um, so that, that's so regional.
Uh, there's lots of flexibility depending on the regional
scenarios, um, at the national championship level, if
that team qualified, that's where that exclusion.
You guys are comfortable with that.
Well, this is about, um,
whether it's a secondary school sport environment
or a youth environment.
So, um, uh, comfortable about Ethan's situation.
No, that's, that's not great and that's not ideal.
Um, but, uh, uh, broadly there are opportunities
for all young people to participate in sport,
not always in their chosen sport in the region they live in.
Um, that's regardless of whether they're homeschool,
whether they're secondary school.
Um, so as we've said, it's not a perfect environment.
Um,
And, and your mediations have, have any schools come
to you saying we wanted, you know,
this has precluded us from putting someone on the team.
We wanted to,
Um, not to our knowledge.
Um, I think the, the ruling
that has changed reasonably recently
for school sport New Zealand is very recent.
Mm-hmm. Um, and so no, to my knowledge we've had no, no,
um, message like that.
We have, uh, if I may speak, we have had some emails
in the last couple of days from families similar
to Ethan who've just found out
that they can't compete in Waka,
they can't compete in multiple sports.
So I'm coming back to school now, um,
and finding out that they're, they're excluded. Um, well
Feel free, we we're sort, unfortunately, we've got more,
um, submissions coming later on
and we'll have to keep moving.
But feel free to forward those to us.
Um, what will happen now, um,
the committee will consider the evidence we've heard.
Um, and it may well be after discussion.
We will come back to you
and ask you more questions of, um, just right at the moment,
we'll just start, we'll, we'll, working
with the information we have the state,
but, uh, we're an inquisitive lot.
So, um, we'll be, uh, we'll be certainly endeavoring to, um,
make sure we, you know, come to the, to the right,
what we ultimately do report back to Parliament on this, um,
with some recommendations based on what we've heard
and what we may hear in the future.
So thank you very much. Um, this is a say, um,
the petitions committee is one
of the more interesting committees.
We get to delve into some issues that, uh,
many other committees don't do.
And this is one of 'em. So thank you
and Ethan, um, good luck, uh, with your,
with your, with your cricket.
Um, and thanks for bringing this to us
and, uh, allowing us to exercise our judgment. Thank you.
Thanks, Mr.